# Synthesis 1 - Project 3: The Systems of Power that Enable the Explotiation of the Environment and Minorities

For this project, the artifact I will be creating will be a multi-part documentary series that will be shown at the Chicano center in downtown San Diego as part of a film exhibition. The first video in the series of documentaries will focus on how race, gender, and the environment and intertwined on a local level – creating a sense of unity among my community. I've ultimately decided to split up the artifact into multiple parts, such that that it is feasible to share specific pieces discussed in my project.

## Part 1 - White Supremacist Ideals of the State

Throughout American History, discrimination against minority groups has been the status quo. 

For African-Americans, it began with the enslavement of their people for hundreds of years, followed only by Jim Crow-era laws that sought to limit the rights and freedoms of black Americans. For Asian-Americans, more than one hundred thousand Asian-Americans were put into concentration camps as a response to the Pearl Harbor bombing; with many of the people put into these concentration camps losing their homes or livelihoods as a result. From 1956 to 1965, the United States implemented the ‘Chinese Confession Program’, in which US citizens of Chinese background were pressured into confessing knowledge regarding illegal Chinese immigrants under fear of deportation, resulting in over twenty thousand Chinese-Americans being wrongfully deported. In contemporary times, Asian-Americans have been the victims of an increase of hate crimes, with hate crimes rising by as much as [567%](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2022/jan/26/san-francisco-increase-hate-crime-anti-asian-aapi) in San Francisco. It's estimated that the numbers could be higher given the history of the San Francisco police department ignoring hate crime reports.

For the Chicano community, the aftermath of countless atrocities is still present, especially among older members of the Chicano Community. In 1954, a gorilla-style campaign spearheaded by Eisenhower sought to forcefully deport nearly 1 million Mexican-Americans in a law enforcement program known as Operation Wetback. In this gorilla-style campaign, countless Mexican-Americans, many of which were legal immigrants and full-fledged US citizens, had their civil rights violated and were deported without being given the chance to prove their legal citizenship. It is estimated that about one million Mexican-Americans were deported in this manner. However, this wasn’t the first or even the largest deportation of Mexican-Americans in the history of the United States. In the 1930s, as a response to the Great Depression, 1.8 million Mexican-Americans were forcefully deported to Mexico under the tension that these citizens were taking away resources and jobs from White Americans. Countless Mexican-Americans died as a result, with hospital patients in critical conditions such as those with tuberculosis and paralysis dropped in rural regions of Mexico such as Mexicali. It is estimated that about 60% of the Mexican-Americans deported during this wave were US Citizens.

Even past the dissolution of Jim Crow-era laws and past the Civil Rights Act of 1964, BIPOC people of color are still severely impacted by the discriminatory and predatory laws of the State that sought to keep them down. For example, red-lining, the practice in which banks refused to give loans to BIPOC people in certain neighborhoods based on their race – effectively prevented many BIPOC families from being able to buy property, severely crippling the ability of BIPOC families to build intergenerational wealth. 

The roots of the United States of America can be traced to the founding documents and population of the State. The United States of America was created by cis white men, and as such has operated in the interest of White Cis Men since its conception – so much so that the doctrine of discovery, written directly into the Constitution dictates that the white man has a claim to the lands of Native people. This can be seen with the white supremacist and imperialistic roots that have enabled the United States of America to commit atrocities against BIPOC people; it is these same ideals and doctrines that have also enabled the destruction of the environment. The same contempt embodied towards BIPOC communities is the same contempt that is embodied and has enabled the destruction of the environment.

---
Additional Readings and Related Projects

> [Project 1](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16zpPInwWJWM8ejtYNBgxSar9klDgt94mhvnwCo6PCLM/edit)

## Part 2 - America Is Not Democratic

The thread that connects all of these issues is the system of power backing them– the State. That is to say, all of the atrocities that occurred in the United States can be linked back to the State, either through legislation that allowed discrimination or the direct discrimination against BIPOC communities by agents of the States such as the police.  The State as defined by Max Weber is  a “ human community that (successfully) claims the monopoly of the legitimate use of physical force within a given territory.” Contextualized, the State is a bureaucratic body that exercises its will over citizens through laws under the threat of violence. The will of the State is often embodied in-laws and legislation that harm or limit the rights of individuals, which are passed by officials elected in what can only be described as a farce democracy. 

Corruption is legal and encouraged in the United States of America and by extension most first-world western liberal democracies. It's simply referred to under the alias of lobbying. In the American Political system, candidates that have more funding to spend on campaigning and traveling will more often than not have a distinct and clear advantage when it comes to the polls, the advantage scaling linearly the more funding one has to spend. That is to say, political sway and power are directly tied to the amount of money one has. It becomes a vicious political cycle where those in positions of wealth can hire lobbyists to donate towards the campaign of a political candidate, not only guaranteeing the success of the candidate at elections but also influencing their political views through monetary gain. Candidates sponsored by lobbyists have an obligation to pass legislation that benefits the lobbyist and argue for the lobbyist or risk losing their monetary support which is vital in winning elections. The lobbied candidates to pass bills and legislation and economically benefit the lobbying group, increasing their profits and receiving government subsidization. According to the Sunlight Foundation, the two hundred most politically active companies in America spent 5.8 billion dollars in lobbying, with those same companies receiving 4.4 trillion dollars worth of tax cuts and government subsidization.

In the Princeton Study ‘Testing Theories of American Politics: Elites, Interest Groups, and Average Citizens’, it was found that the opinions of the average American citizen had little sway in the possibility of policy adoption. In stark contrast, the economic elite had a significant sway on the possibility of policy adoption. As a result of this system, it becomes self-evident that people don’t vote, but instead money votes.

This is not a bi-partisan issue or an issue unique to a specific American Political Party, but instead the symptom of a central authoritarian State which consolidated power within a political elite. The State is an authoritative coercive force, in which one is forced to abide by the laws and regulations imposed by a small group of bureaucratic elite under the threat of violence or seizure of personal rights. In some cases, this bureaucratic elite may be politicians, or in cases such as Mexico, drug cartels that run the country. It cripples the capability of the common folk to address issues in their community and the greater global community gives the vested interest of the ruling class. That is to say, the State and by extension, the government that is a proponent of the State serves to legitimize its rule through violence and consolidation of power within a ruling elite class.

--- 
Additional Readings and Related Projects
> [Industrial Society and Its Future by Ted Kaczynski](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/fc-industrial-society-and-its-future)

## Part 3 -  The Result of a Non-Democratic Consolidation of Power; Racial and Environmental Injustices

The Non-Democratic Consolidation of Power within a wealthy few is what has enabled injustices throughout the history of the United States. In respect to racial injustices, the United States government has historically been made up of and still is predominantly cis white men. This lack of reflection of the actual population of citizens the government was meant to represent was intentional; with underrepsented groups such as women not being able to vote until 1920. Many in the United States government opposed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 on the basis of segregation and racist white supremacist ideals. The same still occurs in respect to environmental injustices.



The issue at hand is that legislature is not voted on by the common citizen, but instead voted by the dollar; with it being that oil and fossil fuel companies being some of the richest in the United States, it was only a matter of time before legislature would pass in vested interest of oil tycoons. For example, the former Trump admistration; an adminstration with close poltical and economic ties to the oil industry not only passed a variety of laws that loosend environmental regulations and allowed for the pollution of the United States, but also appointed pro oil lobbyist to important regulatory possitions, such as the nomination of David Bernhardt to the Deputy Secretary of the Interior. In regards to laws, the Trump administration passed laws that created more lax regulations, increased avaible area for oil drilling, and reversed laws in regards to the ammount of cancerous pollutants that can be released.

Furthermore, under the Trump adminstration, oil subdidization would reach an all time high; unfairly putting oil barrons 

---
Additional Readings and Related Projects
> [Project 2](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1EWhNcejlg1q9PSgylqAqxQj_XAAVKIW-sfsWtB5Xw-8/edit)

## Part 4 -  An Alternative to the State
The State, which is the consolidation of power in a group of bureaucratic individuals that seek to propel their own goals at the cost of the people they rule over, is inherently authoritarian. It strips the common person of the ability to choose what is right or wrong. It strips the 

A society without an authoritarian State is not a society full of strife and chaos. Even in the contemporary global geo-poltical landscape, the State is not a guarantee of stability and peace: War and conflict driven by the State has been an ever present specter in the global stage. From the conflicts of the African continent such as the Sudanese Civil War and Somali Civil War to the present day invasion of Ukraine by Russian forces, it is self-evident that the State is not a deterrent in war. Past conflict  points towards tensions facilitated by the State that are in stark contrast to the will of the people. Take for example, the Vietnam War, a war that was extremely unpopular across the entire political spectrum in the United States. Despite its unpopularity in the United States, it was facilitated and enabled by the United States government.

Even in States described as First-world suffer from a lack of stability and corruption. The United States, despite being the richest country in the world, has 13.4% of its population living in poverty, with BIPOC groups such as Black-americans and Latino-americans suffering disproportionately from poverty rates.

Even the Bible seeks to address the evils of which State authority brings. In the Book of Samuel, the Israelites asked God for a King as to be like other nations (1 Samuel 8:20), yet God objects to the proposal, stating that: “[11] This is what the king who will reign over you will claim as his rights: He will take your sons and make them serve with his chariots and horses, and they will run in front of his chariots. [12] Some he will assign to be commanders of thousands and commanders of fifties, and others to plow his ground and reap his harvest, and still others to make weapons of war and equipment for his chariots. [13] He will take your daughters to be perfumers and cooks and bakers. [14] He will take the best of your fields and vineyards and olive groves and give them to his attendants. [15] He will take a tenth of your grain and of your vintage and give it to his officials and attendants. [16] Your male and female servants and the best of your cattle[c] and donkeys he will take for his own use. [17] He will take a tenth of your flocks, and you yourselves will become his slaves. [18] When that day comes, you will cry out for relief from the king you have chosen, but the Lord will not answer you on that day.” (1 Samuel 8:11 - 20)

Yet human society has existed for thousands of years without a State or central mortal authority. The Irquois people of North America existed for nearly two thousand years in a system that is akin to mutualism, rejecting forms of authority that imposed limitations onto their people. In contemporary geo-poltics, the Zapatistas de Las Chiapas are a group of native Mayans that arose in response to corruption in the communities of Las Chiapas. From drug cartels running rampant in the streets to corrupt police working with organized crime, the Zapatistas organized locally to seek control over their own lands and to 

I propose as a means of addressing and dismantling the system of power that enables oppression is organization on the local level through peaceful means.  

## Project Reflection + Artisti Statement

This project was the most stressful of them all for me. This project underwent and is still going numerous changes and adaptations to best match the story I wanted to tell. This has also defienetly been the project I've invested the most time into, not only just writing and producing the videos for it, but also organizing this project around other on-going social justice efforts. As mentioned before, I am planning on presenting the video of this project in a Chicano film festival at the Chicano Center in Balboa Park, Downtown San Diego. Having worked with them before and being good friends with several other participants of the annual film festival, I discussed what I wanted to do with my vision. After hearing about what I wanted to discuss and how I planned to discuss it, another partcipant who was also discussing the impact of White Supremacy and another who was discussing the lasting impact of intergenerational trauma wanted to colloborate with me. Ultimately, we are going to create a colloborative multi-media endeavor which includes not only film, but art,poetry, music and exhibition staging. Given that this is the first time I am taken a lead role in a multi-media exhibition, I have been both extremely stressed and extremely excited for what is too come.

In regards to the actual writing of this project, I found the hardest part was being able to articulate my ideas in a manner that is easily digestable and convincing to those new to libertarian ideas. That is, I had to define a variety of terms which for me are implicit in my discussion in these topics. Terms such as authority, the State and elaborating on the electoral lobbying process of the United States were all new territory to me, as when I typically engage in discourse around the topic. I found that discussing the topic of systems of power and related systems with other people and noting what they had questions about helped me narrow down what required thorugh definition and what was implicitlty known about the topic at hand.

Something else I also had trouble with when working on this project was a sense of perfectionism. As someone with ADHD and with a perfectionist personality, I was stuck in executive dysfunction for days, attempting to formulate the perfect manner in which I could create the best film I could in the limited time I had. I ultimately settled on what I currently have which is what I am proud of, but I do plan on redoing the audio on it if given the oppurtunity to do so. 


For my project 3, I decided to cover the intersectionality of race, gender, and the environment from a Chicano perspective, discussing how the systems of power that enable discrimination of race and gender are the same the enable the exploitation of the environment, and how the exploitation of the environment comes at the cost of BIPOC people. In regards to this, I was largely inspired by a variety of anarchist-indigenous movements throughout indigenous Mexican history following the invasion of the Spanish, such as Magonism, the Zapatistas, and the general self-autonomous indigenous independence movements of Mexico – all of which aimed to dismantle the systems of power that enabled the shared and linked exploitation of the environment and BIPOC communities. Outside of anarchist-Chicano movements, I was also largely inspired by the Democratic Confederalist Movement of the PKK in regions of Indo Europe. In regards to in-class texts, I was largely inspired by “Fatally Confused” and "the Collapse of Western Civilizations". I also chose to emulate the themes described in Charles's talk. The solution or means of addressing climate change that I will propose is through the establishment of a new social-political system based on social self-governance and local constituency as described in Democratic Confederalist Theory.

## Synthesis 1 Reflection

The course did not change my way of viewing the climate crisis as I was already an avid supporter of addressing the climate crisis. A better way to phrase it would be that this class helped recontexualize the climate crisis for me. As someone who has lived in deserts and coasts my entire life, I know first hand the impact the climate crisis can have the livelihood of my people. What this class did influence however was the manner in which I discussed the climate crisis. I was heavily influenced by the eco poetics of Dungy when it came to exploring the relationship between humanity and the environment. In such a manner, I would say that my view of the climate crisis adapted to view it as humanity neglecting a common aspect that is trampled by the human time systems imposed onto it. Something I found interesting when discussing the climate crisis in class was the manner in which one could discuss it. As mentioend before, Dungy took a very poetic and verbose way to discussing the climate crisis, which had a specific audience in mind. Dungy know they wanted to appeal to fellow poets. In contrast, authors such as McKibben and Kahan employed a lot of facts in their disection of the climate crisis, almost approaching it from a clinical perspective.

In relation to both writing and reading, I would say that this course had some sort of impact on my relationship with both. In regards to reading, it was the Rhetorical Listening article by Radcliffe that helped me realize that as both an author and someone who partcipates in discourse, I was not acting to the fullest extent as an active listener. In realizing such, I have been able to better understand not only discourse, but theory. As a result, it has allowed me to articulate forms of praxis that are more effective given my deepened understanding through active rhetroical listening. In terms of writing, I would say this class was a much needed refresh in terms of my writing abilites. I'm someone who has always enjoyed writing but had never done it outside of oblgiatory school work or film production. However, in writing for this class and connecting the topics learned in class to topics I am personally passionate about, I have been able to rekindle a healthy relationship with writing. The discussion in class would cause me to come up with a variety of film and script ideas that I would jot down in class or after class, building on top of those ideas through active writing.




